website/blog: Added blog post on Bazel TTL bug (#8588)
buildbuddy-io/buildbuddy: website/blog/unusual-builds-w-bytes.md

---
slug: unusual-builds-w-bytes
title: "Unusual Builds with Bytes"
description: "Fixing a download bug in Bazel Built without Bytes"
authors: Son
date: 2025-03-10:12:00:00
image: /img/blog/troubleshooting.png
tags: [bazel, engineering]
---

# Key Takeaways

We discovered a bug in Bazel that was causing builds with `--remote_download_minimal` to download all output artifacts.

A fix was submitted upstream to the Bazel repository and will be part of the Bazel 9.x release. It will also be cherry-picked back to versions 8.2.0 and 7.6.0.

> Users on older versions of Bazel can work around this issue by setting `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl=10000d`, with some caveats.

Reviewer: I think that we should make it clear that the particular value doesn't matter, it just needs to be longer than the expected maximum lifetime of a warm Bazel server.

Author: I tried to keep it simple in the top of the blog post so that folks could immediately grab the key takeaways. I separated the value here to make it a bit more clear, but we should have a proper explanation for the workaround near the end.

 string action_mnemonic = 5;

 // An identifier for the target which produced this action.
 // No guarantees are made around how many actions may relate to a single target.
 string target_id = 6;

 ...
}
```

Here is an example of what this typically looks like in a normal request:
```
{
   "action_id": "bd7fc99ea67ef952abe64d72dba270f04afe6424a1703ed12b3c935e13110597",
   "tool_invocation_id": "a3b93bf2-8b16-4a72-b52f-636bc4db47a0",
   "action_mnemonic": "GoLink",
   "target_id": "//some/package/path:mypackage_test"
}
```

However, there is a special class of request in Bazel called `prefetcher` requests.
```
{
   "action_id": "prefetcher",
   "tool_invocation_id": "8c2a7238-ce49-4149-8bfb-e7a6020294c2",
   "action_mnemonic": "GoLink",
   "target_id": "//some/package/path:mypackage_test"
}
```
These are typically observed when an action is about to be executed locally, but some of its inputs were produced by a parent action that was executed remotely.
In such cases, Bazel would typically issue "prefetch" download requests right after the parent action finishes so that the parent action's outputs can be downloaded to the local machine before the child action starts.

> These requests are often annotated with the `prefetcher` action ID and the target ID of the parent action.

Reviewer: In the case of prefetched inputs, the ID should be the one of the consuming action, not the producing one. When fetching outputs, it's the producing action whose metadata is supplied.

We know that in a typical `go_test` rule, there are a few actions involved:

```
GoCompilePkg
GoCompilePkgExternal
=> GoLink
  => TestRunner
```

and in this case, we can see that all four actions were executed remotely, eliminating the need for any local download.

# The Investigation

While the original intention of the `prefetcher` requests was to [support locally executed actions](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/commit/ea4ad30d4e49b83b62df0e10b5abe2faadea7582), we found that over time, Bazel has been using this action ID for other purposes.
For example, if a user were to specify a `--remote_download_regex=` pattern to download specific artifacts, those download requests would also be annotated with the `prefetcher` action ID.

> As we digged deeper into the issue, we tried to improve the visibility of Prefetch actions in Bazel with [PR#25040](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25040), which was backported to Bazel 8.1.0 and 7.5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we dug deeper into the issue, we tried to improve the traceability of downloads in Bazel with [PR#25040](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25040), which was backported to Bazel 8.1.0 and 7.5.0.
```

Author: Done. I used "prefect downloads" instead though.

> This change breaks down the `prefetcher` action ID into "input" downloads and "output" downloads, allowing us to narrow down the code paths that were triggering the unwanted downloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change breaks down the `prefetcher` action ID into `input` downloads and `output` downloads, allowing us to narrow down the code paths that were triggering the unwanted downloads.
```

Author: good fix. Applied.

Once we had [upgraded to a Bazel version](./blog/bisect-bazel) with this change, we were able to see that the unwanted downloads were coming from the `output` downloads.

# The Bug

We discovered another code path in Bazel that can trigger unexpected downloads: when a blob's TTL expires.

> So... What is a blob's TTL? 🤔

As an artifact-oriented build system, Bazel relies heavily on artifacts existing in its output path to determine if a build is up-to-date.
If an artifact exists and matches the expected result, then Bazel will skip the action that produces the artifact.
However, in a remote build with minimal download, Bazel does not have the artifact locally to validate against and must establish some trust that the artifact was created and stored in the Remote Cache.

Introduced in [PR#17639](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/17639), this "trust" is added to Bazel by storing the expected Time To Live (TTL) of the artifact in the Remote Cache.

> When Bazel executes an action remotely, instead of downloading the outputs referenced inside the ActionResult, it instead just stores the references inside its in-process analysis cache (aka. SkyFrame) with an expected TTL that is determined by the flag `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl` (default: 3 hours).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Bazel executes an action remotely, instead of downloading the outputs referenced inside the ActionResult, it instead just stores the references inside its in-process analysis cache (aka. Skyframe) with an expected TTL that is determined by the flag `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl` (default: 3 hours).
```

When the TTL expires, instead of checking if the output artifacts are up-to-date remotely, Bazel downloads the entire artifact to disk.
We were able to validate this by setting the flag `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl=0s` to eagerly trigger the downloads.

```bash
# Initial build
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=1d
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
1.8M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot

# Incremental build
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=1d
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
1.8M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot

# Incremental build with TTL expired
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=0
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
640M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot
```

> There was a draft fix by [David Sanderson](https://github.com/dws) in [PR#23066](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/23066), however, it was incomplete and never reviewed.

Reviewer: Interesting, I wasn't aware of this PR. It does work around the issue, but its ultimate aim is something else.

> Instead of introducing another flag and asking users to configure Bazel correctly, we decided to submit a different fix in [PR#25398](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25398) with a sensible default: don't download output artifacts once the TTL expires. Instead, just discard the blob metadata with the expired TTL and re-execute the action if needed.

Reviewer: I wouldn't word this as being about a default. I think that the bug was introduced simply due to the confusing naming of the function that checks the metadata (not something about the artifact). I don't think there is ever a case where you would want to download artifacts that you believe may no longer be alive - they might very well not even exist anymore.

Author: I rewrote this section to make it clear that (a) it's a simple bug fix and (b) the draft community PR could potentially be a work around.

        com.google.devtools.build.lib.remote.common.CacheNotFoundException: Missing digest: 9718647251c8d479142d459416079ff5cd9f45031a47aa346d8a6e719e374ffa/28630
        com.google.devtools.build.lib.remote.common.CacheNotFoundException: Missing digest: 785e0ead607a37bd9a12179051e6efe53d7fb3eb05cc291e49ad6965ee2b613d/11504
```

I have documented this problem in detail in our [Troubleshooting RBE Failures docs](https://www.buildbuddy.io/docs/troubleshooting-rbe#cachenotfoundexception-missing-digest).
The TLDR is that you can use a couple of flags together with the TTL flag to mitigate this issue:

```bash
# Set a long TTL to avoid excessive downloads.
# Not needed after Bazel 8.2.0.
# Reference: https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25398
common --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=10000d

# If the Remote Cache evicts the blob data before the TTL expires,
# Bazel will reset itself, dropping all the in-memory metadata before
# retrying the entire build. The value controls how many times Bazel
# would retry before giving up.
#
# Default changed from 0 to 5 since Bazel 8.0.0.

> common --experimental_remote_cache_eviction_retries=5

Reviewer: We could mention that we are working on making this flag more reliable for 8.2.0 with https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25358 and https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25448.

---
slug: unusual-builds-w-bytes

> title: "Unusual Builds with Bytes"

Reviewer: Alternative title suggestion (but this is good as is): 
* "Build with the Bytes - and then some"

> description: "Fixing a download bug in Bazel Built without Bytes"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Fixing a download bug in Bazel Build without Bytes (BwoB)"
```

## The Bug

We discovered another code path in Bazel that can trigger unexpected downloads: when a blob's TTL expires.

> So... What is a blob's TTL? 🤔

As an artifact-oriented build system, Bazel relies heavily on artifacts existing in its output path to determine if a build is up-to-date.
If an artifact exists and matches the expected result, then Bazel will skip the action that produces the artifact.
However, in a remote build with minimal download, Bazel does not have the artifact locally to validate against and must establish some trust that the artifact was created and stored in the Remote Cache.

Introduced in [PR#17639](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/17639), this "trust" is added to Bazel by storing the expected Time To Live (TTL) of the artifact in the Remote Cache.
When Bazel executes an action remotely, instead of downloading the outputs referenced inside the ActionResult, it instead just stores the references inside its in-process analysis cache (aka. Skyframe) with an expected TTL that is determined by the flag `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl` (default: 3 hours).

> When the TTL expires, instead of checking if the output artifacts are up-to-date remotely, Bazel downloads the entire artifact to disk.

Reviewer: We could mention here that this requires the Bazel server to stay alive for the entire TLL, which probably happens more often with BB than elsewhere due to the (usually beneficial) usage of Firecracker etc.

Author: I added a few more lines for this. Do give it another read.

We were able to validate this by setting the flag `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl=0s` to eagerly trigger the downloads.

```bash
# Initial build
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=1d
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
1.8M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot

# Incremental build
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=1d
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
1.8M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot

# Incremental build with TTL expired
$ bazel clean && bazel test //cli/... --config=remote-minimal --disk_cache= --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=0
$ du -h $(bazel info output_base)/execroot | sort -h
...
640M	/private/var/tmp/_bazel_fmeum/412888b82b4f18156bc415025cb8faa1/execroot
```

We fixed this issue in [PR#25398](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25398) by enhacing the logic that validates Bazel's blob metadata and reinforcing it with additional tests.

> Worth noting that there was also a draft fix 8 months ago by a Bazel community member, [David Sanderson](https://github.com/dws), in [PR#23066](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/23066).

Reviewer: It would make more sense to move this down to the workaround section (perhaps after the smiley quote) and making clear that the draft PR is still relevant as follows:

```suggestion
Worth noting that there is also a [draft PR](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/23066) by Bazel community member [David Sanderson](https://github.com/dws), which allows to bind the TTL to the lifetime of the Bazel server. This could have provided a more robust workaround by avoiding the need to hardcode a long TTL.
```

        com.google.devtools.build.lib.remote.common.CacheNotFoundException: Missing digest: 785e0ead607a37bd9a12179051e6efe53d7fb3eb05cc291e49ad6965ee2b613d/11504
```

I have documented this problem in detail in our [Troubleshooting RBE Failures docs](https://www.buildbuddy.io/docs/troubleshooting-rbe#cachenotfoundexception-missing-digest).
The TLDR is that you can use a couple of flags together with the TTL flag to mitigate this issue:

```bash
# Set a long TTL to avoid excessive downloads.
# Not needed after Bazel 8.2.0.
# Reference: https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25398
common --experimental_remote_cache_ttl=10000d

# If the Remote Cache evicts the blob data before the TTL expires,
# Bazel will reset itself, dropping all the in-memory metadata before
# retrying the entire build. The value controls how many times Bazel
# would retry before giving up.
#
# Default changed from 0 to 5 since Bazel 8.0.0.
common --experimental_remote_cache_eviction_retries=5
```

We are also improving the reliability of eviction retry via [PR#25358](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25358) and [PR#25448](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/pull/25448) for future Bazel releases.

> As a longer term strategy, we are researching proper way to implement Action Rewinding in Bazel so that missing artifacts can be recreated seamlessly by re-running the action that produced them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a longer term strategy, we are researching ways to add support for Action Rewinding to Bazel so that missing artifacts can be recreated seamlessly within a single build by re-running the actions that produced them.
```

Author: Done

---
slug: unusual-builds-w-bytes
title: "Unusual Builds with Bytes"
description: "Fixing a download bug in Bazel Build without Bytes (BwoB)"
authors: son
date: 2025-03-10:12:00:00

> image: /img/blog/troubleshooting.png

Author: TODO: replace this image. (currently re-using the one from the bisect blog post)

---
slug: unusual-builds-w-bytes
title: "Unusual Builds with Bytes"
description: "Fixing a download bug in Bazel Build without Bytes (BwoB)"
authors: son
date: 2025-03-10:12:00:00
image: /img/blog/troubleshooting.png
tags: [bazel, engineering]
---

We discovered a bug in Bazel that was causing builds with `--remote_download_minimal` to download all output artifacts.

A fix has been submitted upstream to the Bazel repository and will be included in the Bazel 9.x release. It will also be cherry-picked back to versions 8.2.0 and 7.6.0.

Users on older versions of Bazel can work around this issue by setting `--experimental_remote_cache_ttl` to a large value, such as `10000d`, with some caveats.

<!-- truncate -->

## Introduction

> At BuildBuddy, we not only operate a Bazel Remote Cache and Remote Build Execution service, but we also operate Bazel, the client-side, for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At BuildBuddy, we not only operate a Bazel Remote Cache and Remote Build Execution service, but we can also operate Bazel, the client-side, for you.
```

> This is done through our two offerings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is done through two offerings:
```

The snapshots are typically chunked and stored in our Remote Cache, which allows us to share the cache across multiple machines.
This provides a fast and consistent build environment for every build.

To keep typical builds speedy, we strongly encourage our users to use this in conjunction with our Remote Cache and Remote Build Execution features.
This allows us to shift most of the compute demands to a fleet of workers (BuildBuddy Executors) instead of performing them on the MicroVMs.
Coupled with Bazel's Build without Bytes feature through the `--remote_download_minimal` flag, we also skip downloading the output artifacts back to the MicroVM.
The smaller the MicroVMs, the faster we can snapshot, cache, and restore them.
For this reason, we have invested significant effort in tracking and reducing resource usage on the MicroVMs.

## The Symptoms

In recent months, we started to notice that in some of our CI builds, the MicroVMs were downloading a lot of data.
This could reach hundreds of gigabytes according to statistics tracked by our Remote Cache server.

> As we heavily utilize the `--remote_download_minimal` flag, the MicroVMs are typically sized with a small disk space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we heavily utilize the `--remote_download_minimal` flag, the MicroVMs are typically sized with small disks.
```

With hundreds of gigabytes of data being downloaded, the MicroVMs were running out of disk space, causing builds to fail.

<figure>
![](../static/img/blog/build-without-bytes.svg)
<figcaption>Build without Bytes helps skip the unnecessary downloads</figcaption>

> </figure>

Author: should this be moved to the "Introduction" section? 🤔
